In this lecture, we are going to begin writing the query for a grabbing a random recipe before we get
into writing code.
There's an important concept we should cover.
WordPress has a feature called Transients.
In the resource section of this lecture, I provide a link to the documentation page for this feature.
Up until now, data stored in a database has been permanent.
It's possible to delete data, but it's not common.
Storing data in a database is a great way to persist data.
However, what if we want to store data temporarily?
We could use variables, but a variable is cleared from a system's memory after PHP is finished running.
Transients are the solution for storing data for longer than a few seconds.
A transient is a value stored in the database.
The record will be deleted after a specific expiration time.
Best of all, WordPress manages this process for us.
We never need to worry about deleting the record from the database.
WordPress automates the leading a record past an expiration time.
The question becomes Why do we need transients?
Our block will display the recipe of the day.
Every day we're going to refresh the recipe.
The ID of the current recipe will be stored in a database for 24 hours.
After 24 hours, the ID should be deleted.
A new ID will take its place.
Transients are the perfect solution for handling this scenario.
We are going to store the ID of the recipe with the Transients API.
If WordPress deletes the value from the database, we can safely query the database again for another
recipe.
It's a great API for caching data.
Let's get started by heading over to our editors in the includes directory.
Create a file called Generate Daily Recipe PHP.
Inside this file.
Define a function called up generate daily recipe.
This function will be responsible for querying the database for a recipe.
WordPress does not have a function for generating a randomized value.
Since that's the case, we will be writing a custom SQL query inside the function.
Let's grab the WP DB global variable.
Next, define a variable called ID.
The value for this variable will be the wp db get var function.
The goal of this query is to grab a single value.
We're not interested in the entire record of a post.
The VAR function is our best option for retrieving a single value from a query, unlike before.
We're not going to prepare the query.
Preparing the query is useful for sanitizing a query that has user input.
For this query, the query will not be created with user input.
It's going to be a hard coded query inside the get var function.
Type the following query.
Select ID from WP db posts.
The query we're building will select the ID column from the post table.
We're not hard coding the name of the table.
WordPress has a property for the WP post table.
I prefer dynamically inserting the name over hard coding.
The name.
The name of the table may change by relying on WordPress to set the name, we can safely avoid typos.
Next, let's add the following to the query where post status equals publish and post type equals recipe.
The results will be filtered by two conditions.
Not all posts are published immediately.
Some authors may want to create drafts of a recipe.
We're not interested in drafts.
The posts table can store drafted and published posts.
In this query, we're limiting the results to published posts.
The second condition will limit the posts further to the recipe post type.
All post types are stored in the post table.
This includes custom post types.
Once again, we're not interested in another post types besides recipes.
After these conditions, let's finalize the query with the following code order by random limit one.
By default, the database will order the results in descending order.
Our goal is to grab a random recipe.
SQL has a function called random for randomizing the records in a database.
This will not affect the database directly.
It will only affect the results.
We can sort the ordering by using the order by keywords.
The last keyword is called limits.
The limit keyword will limit the results returned by the query.
After this keyword, we can specify the limit.
Overall, this query will retrieve the ID from a random record in the post table.
Let's store the ID in our database after the ID variable.
Run a function called set transient.
The set's transient function will store the value in the database with an expiration date.
The first argument of this function is the custom name of the transient.
Let's set the name to up daily recipe ID.
The second argument is the value pass and the ID variable.
Lastly, we must provide the expiration in seconds.
Let's head back to the documentation page for the Transients API.
On the sidebar, there is a link called Using Time Constraints.
Click on it.
This link will take you to a section with a list of constraints defined by WordPress.
We can manually provide a time.
On the other hand, WordPress has constants for the most common expiration times.
I prefer to use these constants.
Let's grab the day in seconds.
Constant.
Next, let's update the set's transient function by passing in this constant as the value for the third
argument.
Lastly, let's return the ID from the function.
This function is not tied to a specific hook or request.
It's a plain PHP function.
The reason is simple.
It's because we'll be performing the action of grabbing a recipe from different locations in our app
to prevent our code base from becoming repetitive.
We've outsourced the logic into a separate function.
In the next lecture, we are going to call this function for grabbing a post.
I'll see you there.